# scPerturBench
## scPerturBench introduction
Single-cell perturbation technologies offer powerful platforms to investigate gene functions and regulatory networks at single-cell resolution by applying targeted perturbations. However, conducting large-scale perturbation screens, especially for combination perturbations, presents significant challenges due to the exponential increase in complexity. Various computational methods have been developed to predict perturbation effects, while despite claims of promising performance, great concerns on the true efficacy of these models have been raised, particularly when evaluated across diverse unseen cellular contexts and unseen perturbations. In addition, the effectiveness of foundation models in perturbation effects prediction remains inconclusive. To this end, a comprehensive benchmark of 21 single cell perturbation response prediction methods including genetic and chemical perturbations, with 29 datasets for the method generalizations in unseen cellular contexts and unseen perturbations, using different evaluation metrics, were conducted. The performance of different methods including foundation models under different test scenarios were systematically evaluated. Tips regarding the method limitations, method generalizations and method selections were presented. Finally, an applicable solution by leveraging prior knowledge through cellular context embedding to achieve improved model generalization in new cellular context is presented. Collectively, our results emphasize the need for more tailored and rigorous approaches in single-cell perturbation effects prediction to enhance model reliability and generalization in diverse scenarios.
